Citation: Duriez, A.; Bergerot, C.;
Cone, J.J.; Roitman, M.F.; Gutkin, B.
Homeostatic Reinforcement Theory
Accounts for Sodium Appetitive
State- and Taste-Dependent
Dopamine Responding. Nutrients
2023, 15, 1015. https://doi.org/
10.3390/nu15041015
Academic Editor: Micah Leshem
Received: 24 November 2022
Revised: 9 February 2023
Accepted: 11 February 2023
Published: 17 February 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
nutrients
Article
Homeostatic Reinforcement Theory Accounts for Sodium
Appetitive State- and Taste-Dependent Dopamine Responding
Alexia Duriez 1,2
 , Clémence Bergerot 1,3,4,5 , Jackson J. Cone 6
 , Mitchell F. Roitman 7 and Boris Gutkin 1, *
1 Group for Neural Theory, LNC2 DEC ENS, PSL University, 75005 Paris, France
2 School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
3 Charité—Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Einstein Center for Neurosciences Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany
4 Institute for Theoretical Biology, Department of Biology, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Philippstraße 13,
10115 Berlin, Germany
5 Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Berlin, Philippstr. 13, 10115 Berlin, Germany
6 Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Department of Psychology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada
7 Department of Psychology, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA
* Correspondence: boris.gutkin@ens.fr; Tel.: +33-(0)6-8631-6231
Abstract: Seeking and consuming nutrients is essential to survival and the maintenance of life.
Dynamic and volatile environments require that animals learn complex behavioral strategies to obtain
the necessary nutritive substances. While this has been classically viewed in terms of homeostatic
regulation, recent theoretical work proposed that such strategies result from reinforcement learning
processes. This theory proposed that phasic dopamine (DA) signals play a key role in signaling
potentially need-fulﬁlling outcomes. To examine links between homeostatic and reinforcement
learning processes, we focus on sodium appetite as sodium depletion triggers state- and taste-
dependent changes in behavior and DA signaling evoked by sodium-related stimuli. We ﬁnd that
both the behavior and the dynamics of DA signaling underlying sodium appetite can be accounted for
by a homeostatically regulated reinforcement learning framework (HRRL). We ﬁrst optimized HRRL-
based agents to sodium-seeking behavior measured in rodents. Agents successfully reproduced
the state and the taste dependence of behavioral responding for sodium as well as for lithium and
potassium salts. We then showed that these same agents account for the regulation of DA signals
evoked by sodium tastants in a taste- and state-dependent manner. Our models quantitatively
describe how DA signals evoked by sodium decrease with satiety and increase with deprivation.
Lastly, our HRRL agents assigned equal preference for sodium versus the lithium containing salts,
accounting for similar behavioral and neurophysiological observations in rodents. We propose that
animals use orosensory signals as predictors of the internal impact of the consumed good and our
results pose clear targets for future experiments. In sum, this work suggests that appetite-driven
behavior may be driven by reinforcement learning mechanisms that are dynamically tuned by
homeostatic need.
Keywords: sodium appetite; dopamine; homeostasis; reinforcement learning
1. Introduction
Seeking and consuming nutrients is essential to survival and the maintenance of life.
Animals living in dynamic and volatile environments must develop complex behavioral
strategies to obtain the necessary nutritive substances. This has been classically viewed in
terms of homeostatic regulation, where complex nutrient-seeking behaviors are triggered
by physiological need. Animals also seek nutrients in advance of acute need. How animals
acquire nutrient-directed behaviors has most often been examined through the lens of
reinforcement learning (RL) theories. In RL, subjects acquire information about signals
from the environment that are associated with the receipt of reward [1]. Importantly, RL
signals are distributed throughout the brain [2,3]. Similarly, physiological need impacts a
Nutrients 2023, 15, 1015. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15041015 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
Nutrients 2023, 15, 1015 2 of 22
wide array of brain circuits that regulate behaviors motivated by nutrient rewards [4–6].
Intriguingly, the vast majority of RL theories do not treat the physiological origins of
primary reward seeking, nor do they speak to how nutrients and their associated values are
modulated by internal state. To maximize survival, physiological needs should augment
signals that drive RL to promote learning in environments that offer access to essential
nutrients. Thus, the reinforcing value of a nutrient, and consequently the degree to which
an RL-based agent can learn from actions that acquire said nutrient, should be modulated
in an appetite-dependent manner.
An essential area for exploration is thus the degree to which homeostatic and reinforce-
ment learning processes are coupled in the central nervous system. RL processes have been
most closely associated with mesolimbic circuitry, namely the midbrain DA neurons and
their major target, the striatum [7–9]. While debate remains as to the role of DA in RL [10],
it is increasingly clear that midbrain DA neurons and their responses to essential nutrients
are modulated by physiological state, through direct hormonal inﬂuence [ 11–14] or via
interactions with homeostatic and/or related circuits [ 15–20]. A particularly powerful
example of the impact of physiological need on motivated behavior and DA signaling is
sodium appetite. Sodium appetite is a natural behavior [21] whereby a sodium deﬁcit gen-
erates sodium-seeking behaviors and selective consumption of sodium over other nutrients.
Under homeostatic conditions, rodents avoid consumption of hypertonic sodium solutions.
However, sodium depletion (via injection of a diuretic/natriuretic, e.g., furosemide) or
removal of the adrenal glands [ 22] induces avid consumption of hypertonic sodium so-
lutions and appetitive taste reactivity [23]. Importantly, phasic DA responses to the taste
of a hypertonic sodium solution are dynamically sensitive to sodium balance [16,17]. As
with behavior, the DA response in sodium-depleted rats is blocked by lingual application
of the epithelial sodium channel blocker amiloride [16] and is selective for sodium solu-
tions [17]. Lithium chloride, a notable exception, is equally preferred [17,24], likely due to
sodium taste ﬁbers responding to lithium as well (but not potassium) [25]. These data argue
strongly that information related to the current state of sodium balance is communicated to
midbrain DA neurons to regulate brain signals thought to drive RL. Taken together, these
data pose a major challenge to current state of the art RL theories, and novel RL models
need to be developed that account for the impact of physiological need and the role of
gustatory information on reward learning. Sodium appetite is an ideal paradigm to address
this issue.
We recently put forth a homeostatic reinforcement learning (HRRL) framework that
was developed to study how animals learn need-based adaptive behavioral strategies
in their environment to obtain rewarding outcomes [ 26,27]. The HRRL agent learns to
maximize the total cumulative reward by performing actions and predicting the impact of
their outcome on its internal state. This framework relies on a new deﬁnition of rewards:
the rewarding value of an action is a function of the predicted impact on the difference
between the current internal state and the ideal one (i.e., “setpoint”). The function that links
the internal states to rewards is called the drive function. In other words, the reinforcing
value of a stimulus is modulated by the degree to which it alleviates or exacerbates a
physiological need. In this way, HRRL joins the predictive homeostatic regulation and
reinforcement learning theories by positing that minimizing deviations from a homeostatic
setpoint and maximizing reward are equivalent. In other words HRRL synthesizes RL
algorithms with the drive reduction theories of motivation [ 28]. HRRL has been used
to simulate the consumption of various resources and reproduce experimental data. It
can also be used to represent complex behavior such as anticipatory responding, binge
eating [26] and cocaine addiction [29]. Interestingly, it can be shown mathematically that
HRRL agents show predictive allostatic behavior and HRRL accounts for the incentive
salience proposals: the internal state of the HRRL agents is dynamically changed according
to upcoming challenges and the action values (incentives) are modulated dynamically by
the internal state of the animal.
Nutrients 2023, 15, 1015 3 of 22
Here, we show that the HRRL model can account for sodium-seeking behavior and
DA signaling in rats. We ﬁrst required the HRRL models to reproduce behavioral data
showing that sodium-deprived rats preferred sodium and lithium over potassium solutions.
We then showed that such HRRL agents also reproduce the dynamics of DA signals. We
then used the models to make several predictions about satiety-dependent modulation of
behavior and how exposure to lithium may only modulate the behavior and the reinforcing
value sodium.
2. Methods
2.1. HRRL Theory for Sodium Consumption
2.1.1. State Space Representation
The internal state is considered a continuous variable that can be represented at each
time t by a point in a homeostatic state space. As theorized by Keramati and Gutkin [26],
this state space has one dimension per homeostatic variable. The ideal internal state is the
equilibrium point of the homeostatic state space. This point we call the setpoint represents
the internal state that maximizes the chances of survival (satiety). It is denoted by H* = (h1*,
h2*, . . . , hN*). In this study, the state space has only one dimension, corresponding to the
internal sodium level.
2.1.2. Reward Calculation Mechanism
The HRRL theory provides a function called the drive, which takes as its argument the
degree of departure from a “satiety” point and has a unique minimum at that setpoint. The
drive is a function of the deviation of the animal’s internal stateHt from its homeostatic
setpoint H* (Figure 1). In a homeostatic state space with one dimension, the drive is given
by the following expression [26]:
D(Ht) = m
√
|h∗−ht|n (1)
where t represents the time, m and n are free parameters that inﬂuence, non-linearly, the
mapping between homeostatic deviations and the rewarding value of their reduction.
As an animal performs an action, its internal state is modiﬁed by the outcome Kt of
the action. The homeostatic reward is deﬁned in a non-circular way, as the reduction in the
homeostatic distance from the setpoint caused by the outcome Kt.
r, Kt = D(Ht) −D(Ht+1) (2)
r(Ht, Kt) = D(Ht) −D(Ht + Kt) (3)
The reward associated with taking an action from state Ht resulting in an outcome Kt
that transitions the internal state to Ht+1 is positive if the subsequent internal state (Ht+1)
remains below or equal to the setpoint However, if the animal is currently at its setpoint
(i.e., Ht = H∗), the reward value obtained with the outcome Kt is negative: the outcome is
negatively reinforcing.
Nutrients 2023, 15, 1015 4 of 22
Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 24 
 
 
Nutrients 2023, 15, x. https://doi.org/10.3390/xxxxx www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients 
 
Figure 1. (A) Drive as a function of the internal sodium level. The optimal sodium level is denoted 
by H*, indicated by a dot. The current sodium state of the agent at time t is 𝐻௧. An action apports an 
outcome that impacts the sodium level denoted by 𝐾௧, transitioning the internal state to Ht + 1 = Ht 
+ Kt. The change in the drive functi on is defined as the reward r = ΔD (Ht, Ht + Kt). (B) Probability 
distributions for parameter valu es yielding model results cons istent with the experimental 
observations. Parameters are, from top to bottom: the setpoint H*, the learning rate 𝜖, the rate of 
exploration 𝛽, the fixed outcome K, the loss of sodium after each  trial and the energy cost of 
drinking. If each parameter takes a value with a high probability, the simulation results are 
consistent with the experimental observation. Fo r each pair of parameters, the joint probability 
distribution that the two parameters fall in th eir respective range of possible values is also 
represented. Distributions obtained following Go nçalvez et al. [30], see Methods for details. ( C) 
Diagram of the agent computations during a sing le trial (adapted from Schultz [31]). After 
performing an action, the agent receives a rewa rd computed with the drive function and the 
estimated outcome of the action. The reward predic tion error will be used to update the predicted 
value of this action and the probability of the agent to choose it at the next trial. In the meantime, 
Figure 1. (A) Drive as a function of the internal sodium level. The optimal sodium level is de-
noted by H*, indicated by a dot. The current sodium state of the agent at time t is Ht. An action
apports an outcome that impacts the sodium level denoted by Kt, transitioning the internal state to
Ht + 1 = Ht + Kt. The change in the drive function is deﬁned as the reward r = ∆D (Ht, Ht + Kt).
(B) Probability distributions for parameter values yielding model results consistent with the experi-
mental observations. Parameters are, from top to bottom: the setpoint H*, the learning rate ϵ, the
rate of exploration β, the ﬁxed outcome K, the loss of sodium after each trial and the energy cost of
drinking. If each parameter takes a value with a high probability, the simulation results are consistent
with the experimental observation. For each pair of parameters, the joint probability distribution that
the two parameters fall in their respective range of possible values is also represented. Distributions
obtained following Gonçalvez et al. [30], see Methods for details. (C) Diagram of the agent computa-
tions during a single trial (adapted from Schultz [31]). After performing an action, the agent receives
a reward computed with the drive function and the estimated outcome of the action. The reward
prediction error will be used to update the predicted value of this action and the probability of the
agent to choose it at the next trial. In the meantime, the agent receives the outcome of the action,
which modiﬁes its internal state and its prediction of this outcome.
Nutrients 2023, 15, 1015 5 of 22
2.1.3. Taste Value Estimation Mechanism
We hypothesize that animals sense the rewarding value of a tastant through the
gustatory information they receive before experiencing its post-ingestive qualities [26]. The
reward is thus computed by the animals’ orosensory approximation of the nutritional value
Kt given the amount of solution they consumed. This estimate of the outcome, based on
the orosensory properties of the stimulus, is denoted by ˆKt. The reward therefore becomes:
r
(
Ht , ˆKt
)
= D(Ht) −D
(
Ht + ˆKt
)
(4)
We further hypothesize that ˆKt is not constant. In our model, ˆKt is learned with a
learning rate ϵ through tasting the corresponding solution and experiencing its impact
on the internal sodium level Ht. We introduced this aspect since it has been suggested
that assigning a reinforcing value to a taste of food requires that the animal experiences its
nutritional impact [32]. According to this study, hungry animals learn that a taste stimulus
is predictive of a need-reducing reward by experiencing the association between these two
properties of food. We consider that ˆKt also has an innate non-zero initial value, which
is supported by recording of DA transients: the ﬁrst NaCl infusion already elicits a DA
response [16].
ˆKt = ˆKt−1 + ϵδk (5)
δk= Kt − ˆKt (6)
It has been shown that in the absence of prior experience, sodium-depleted rats cannot
discriminate between sodium and lithium chloride [17]. We therefore hypothesize that taste
information alone is insufﬁcient to distinguish between sodium and lithium in the absence
of any post-ingestive impact on D. In our model, this means that, for naïve animals, sodium
and lithium have the same ˆKt, which represents the estimated impact of a sodium-like
tasting solution on the internal state.
2.1.4. Action Value Estimation Mechanism
With the Q-learning method, rats estimate the value v of each choice as they discover
which actions are more rewarding than the others [33] Once a rat executes an action a and
the homeostatic reward r is computed, the value v(a) of this action is updated using the
reward prediction error (RPE), δr, with the learning rate ϵ [26].
v(a) ← v(a) + ϵδr (7)
δr = r(Ht, ˆKt) −v(a) −cost (8)
The cost is a penalty we introduced in this model associated with the energy cost
of approaching the sipper tubes and consuming any of the solutions. By decreasing the
reward prediction error term (RPE), it reduces the reinforcing value of an action, and thus
the motivation of the agent to pursue that action in the future. We assume that the cost of
approaching and drinking from a sipper tube is a priori encoded in the rats’ representation
of their environment.
δr is the RPE signal that is purportedly encoded by midbrain dopaminergic neurons
(e.g., see [34]). We therefore monitor the RPE by sampling DA ﬂuctuations in the Nucleus
Accumbens (NAc). A positive RPE in our model corresponds to a phasic DA response in
the NAc. The RPE signal is negative when the predicted reward is superior to the actual
one. The RPE can also be negative for actions that yield no reward due to the energy cost
associated with performing said action.
